
What is JpaSpecificationExecutor?
Ans:  It gives our repository the ability to execute dynamic specifications.

category provided?
      ↓
YES → add category condition

status provided?
      ↓
YES → add status condition

minPrice provided?
      ↓
YES → add price >= minPrice

maxPrice provided?
      ↓
YES → add price <= maxPrice



What is Specification?
→ A reusable definition of the WHERE conditions for a query.

What is Root?
→ Root represents the entity/table we are querying.

What is CriteriaBuilder?
→ CriteriaBuilder helps us build query conditions/predicates.

What is Predicate?
-> A Predicate represents a condition.


@Transactional
@Transactional is a Spring annotation used to manage database transactions. It makes multiple database operations work as one unit.

If all operations are successful → Commit (save changes).
If an error occurs → Rollback (undo changes).
Transaction flow:
Begin → Perform Operations → Commit/Rollback → End

ACID Properties
ACID defines the 4 important properties of a database transaction:

Atomicity – All operations succeed, or none of them happen.
Consistency – Database remains in a valid and correct state.
Isolation – One transaction should not interfere with another transaction.
Durability – Once data is committed, it remains saved even after a failure.
Example:
In a money transfer, money is deducted from Account A and added to Account B. If adding money to B fails, the deduction from A is also rolled back.





Persistence Context
A Persistence Context is a temporary working area where JPA/Hibernate manages and tracks entities.
When an entity is loaded inside a transaction:

Product product = repository.findById(id).get();

Hibernate puts the Product into the Persistence Context and starts tracking it.

If we change it:
product.setPrice(1000);

we don't need to call save() because Hibernate uses Dirty Checking to detect the change and automatically sends an UPDATE to the database when the transaction commits.

Easy Flow
Database
   ↓
Persistence Context
   ↓
Managed Entity
   ↓
Change entity
   ↓
Dirty Checking
   ↓
UPDATE Database

In simple words:

Persistence Context is the place where Hibernate keeps and tracks managed entities so it can automatically detect and save their changes.





Interviewer: Why can a JPA entity be updated without calling repository.save()?
Ans : If an entity is loaded inside an active transaction, it becomes managed by the JPA Persistence Context. Hibernate tracks changes to managed entities using dirty checking. When the Persistence Context is flushed, usually around transaction commit, Hibernate generates the required SQL UPDATE automatically. Therefore, explicitly calling save() isn't necessary just to persist changes to that managed entity.





flush():
Flush kya hai?
flush() Hibernate ko bolta hai: "Persistence Context ke pending changes ko abhi DB ke saath synchronize karo."

Kyo zarurat padti hai?
Normally Hibernate transaction ke end mein automatically flush karta hai.
flush() tab use karte hain jab humein SQL ko immediately execute karwana ho ya DB constraint/error ko usi point par check karna ho.

Dirty Checking se kya relation hai?
Dirty checking identify karta hai ki managed entity mein kya change hua.

Entity change
    ↓
Dirty Checking → change detect
    ↓
flush() → UPDATE SQL execute



flush() vs commit()

flush  = SQL DB ko bhejo/execute karo
commit = transaction ko successfully finalize karo

flush() ke baad bhi agar exception aati hai, transaction rollback ho sakta hai.

One-line interview answer
Flush means Hibernate ke pending changes ko DB ke saath synchronize karna; dirty checking changes detect karta hai, flush SQL execute karwata hai, aur commit transaction ko final karta hai.
